---
title: 'Implementing R5RS''s Macro System: Hygiene'
date: 2017-11-12
tags:
- Scheme
- Macro
keywords:
- scheme
- macro
- hygiene
- r5rs
mathjax: true
---

Macro hygiene is an important characteristic of Scheme's macro system to avoid inadvertent variable capturing. Several algorithms were devised to implement hygiene, among which is the famous KFFD algorithm, which runs in $O(n^2)$ time, sort of slow. Another is the syntactic closure, whose major defect is the incompatibility with R5RS's pattern language. An algorithm combined KFFD with the syntactic closure, running in $O(n)$ time, was presented in [MTW]. I will briefly discuss the implementation of the algorithm in [MTW] and some caveats in this post.  
<!-- more -->
A practical way to implement hygiene is renaming. In the following program, the macro use `(foo x)` expands to $(\text{list} \; \text{x}_1 \; \text{x}_2)$, where $\text{x}_1$ denotes the outer `x` (whose value is `1`), $\text{x}_2$ denotes the inner `x` (whose values is `2`), and $\text{list}$ denotes the builtin function `list`. The final result is `(1 2)`.  
```scheme
(let ([x 1])
  (let-syntax ([foo (syntax-rules ()
                      [(_ a) (list x a)])])
    (let ([x 2])
      (foo x))))
```
We can rename these `x`s to distinguish them more clearly:  
```scheme
(let ([x.1 1])
  (let-syntax ([foo (syntax-rules ()
                      [(_ a) (list x.1 a)])])
    (let ([x.2 2])
      (foo x.2))))
```
This is the basic idea of the algorithm in [MTW], to rename every local variable to avoid potential name conflict.  
The macro expander is typically a code walker.  I won't show the details of the expander. A simple working code is at [arucil/macros_that_work.scm](https://gist.github.com/arucil/d81aa6df8110a20ec37d2009bf7a7c21). A full-fledged macro expander is at [arucil/MyScheme](https://github.com/arucil/MyScheme).
The expander recursively expands every subexpression of the expression, then construct the expanded expression with these expanded subexpressions. During the expansion, it maintains an environment, mapping every name to corresponding denotation, in which the denotation is either an identifier or a macro transformer. Global variables are not in the environment, and the denotations of global variables are the identifiers themselves.
For example, the `if` form is expanded as following:
```scheme
`(if ,(macroexpand (cadr exp) env)
     ,(macroexpand (caddr exp) env)
     ,(macroexpand (cadddr exp) env))
```
When expanding lambda forms, the expander renames every formal arguments, extends the environment, mapping the original arguments to the renamed arguments, and then expands the lambda body in the extended environment. The following lambda form,  
```scheme
(lambda (x)
  (lambda (y)
    (+ x y)))
```
after renaming the formal argument `x`, yields the intermediate form
```scheme
(lambda (x.1)
  (lambda (y)
    (+ x y)))
```
and the environment is extended to `((x . x.1) ...)`. The body `(lambda (y) (+ x y))` will be expanded in the extended environment, which finally yields the form:  
```scheme
(lambda (x.1)
  (lambda (y.2)
    (+ x.1 y.2)))
```
To distinguish different renaming phases, the expander suffixes the original arguments with an incrementing number.  
When a macro expression is found, the expression and the environment are passed to the macro transformer, which yields an expanded expression and a new environment, and the expanded expression will be furtherly expanded in the new environment.  
When a macro definition is found, a macro transformer should be built. The identifiers in the templates of the macro should be renamed, so they can be distinguished from the identifiers introduced by macro arguments when being expanded. The template in the following macro,  
```scheme
(let ([x 1])
  (let-syntax ([foo (syntax-rules ()
                      [(_ a) (list x a)])])
    (let ([x 2])
      (foo x))))
```
after renaming, becomes  
```scheme
(let ([x.1 1])
  (let-syntax ([foo (syntax-rules ()
                      [(_ a) (list x.1 a)])])
    (let ([x 2])
      (foo x))))
```
The identifier `list` remains what is was, because it denotes the global function `list`.  
In practice, what must be taken into account is that a macro may introduce quotations, in which the identifiers must be left un-renamed, so the environment carried by the macro expander must store both the renamed identifiers and the original identifiers. After a macro introduces a `quote` form, the expander traverses the form, recovering renamed identifiers.

# Bibliography
**[MTW]** *Macros that work*, William Clinger, et al